But good afternoon.
NOTE CONF
This is quite a dense lecture, I'm afraid so.
We will get going.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for turning out on a cold afternoon.
Although possibly, if your place is anything like mine, you
NOTE CONF
feel inclined to let the university pay for the heating
rather than you.
NOTE CONF
So last week we talked about finite automata, finite state
machines, and we talked about them deterministically.
NOTE CONF
There was a lot of notation introduced, a lot of
pictures, a lot of symbols.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully the fact that you have all more or less
successfully programmed them up in Haskell has helped bed everything
NOTE CONF
in.
Are there any questions from last week or questions about
NOTE CONF
the basics, anything that you didn't understand after doing the
tutorial.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this week we're going to continue with these
machines.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to talk about a kind of machine
that at first sight doesn't make a lot of sense,
NOTE CONF
but turns out to be very useful.
And also a little bit about how we actually use
NOTE CONF
them in practice.
So who are today's people?
NOTE CONF
These are both people I know.
Michael Rubin is one of the greatest logicians, and computer
NOTE CONF
scientists and set theorists and complexity theorists of the 20th
century has produced many seminal results.
NOTE CONF
Dana Scott.
is someone whose connection with the topics today goes back
NOTE CONF
quite early in his career, and later on contributed to
a vast array of topics in theoretical computer science semantics.
NOTE CONF
Dana is was the supervisor for a number of our
most senior professors here.
NOTE CONF
And as you can see, he's quite old now, so
even the people he supervised are now retired.
NOTE CONF
But at least as of the last time I checked,
he was still around.
NOTE CONF
So what are we talking about today?
I want to start by thinking about what we did
NOTE CONF
last week.
We thought about a way to build an automaton that
NOTE CONF
is kind of the sum of two automata, in the
sense that it accepts both the languages of the two
NOTE CONF
bits.
So we had the.
NOTE CONF
What's this one?
This is the.
NOTE CONF
Um, even number of zeros.
And this is the odd number of ones.
NOTE CONF
And when we built the some construction which I wrote
with this little D, because we were doing everything with
NOTE CONF
deterministic automata, we said, well, we can do it.
It's exactly the same as building the project, the product.
NOTE CONF
But the set of accepting states is simply the union
of the set of accepting states instead of a product.
NOTE CONF
So our accepting states of those where either component is
accepting.
NOTE CONF
So we said build the product.
And this is accepting because E0 is this is accepting
NOTE CONF
because O1 is this is accepting because O1 is.
Um, that was a little bit odd because it's odd
NOTE CONF
for product to look like sum but it works.
Now I want to think about Another way of thinking
NOTE CONF
about it.
Skip that bit.
NOTE CONF
Kind of boring.
So that was just the evaluation of it.
NOTE CONF
But we saw that last week.
Um, why do we need to do this?
NOTE CONF
So why do we actually have to build this product
automaton?
NOTE CONF
We've taken a two, two, two state automata, and we've
protected them and added some more transitions.
NOTE CONF
But wouldn't it somehow be nicer if we could just
take the two original automata, not connect them in any
NOTE CONF
way, and just run them together and say, if one
of them says yes, that's fine.
NOTE CONF
Or indeed, if we're looking for the product of both
of them, say, yes, that's fine, but that's a harder
NOTE CONF
question.
Well, that's just what we did, right when we built
NOTE CONF
the product and turned it into the sum.
The way we constructed the product was by taking the
NOTE CONF
two components and running them independently.
We ran this half and this half, and we made
NOTE CONF
product states, which let us track the state in each
of the two halves independently.
NOTE CONF
Why can't we just treat this as a DFA by
itself?
NOTE CONF
Well, because it isn't deterministic.
It's not deterministic, chiefly because it has two start states.
NOTE CONF
This is a start state, and this is a start
state.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's not a deterministic finite automaton, but is
it something else?
NOTE CONF
Well, if you remember, when I introduced finite automaton, I
gave a definition of finite automaton.
NOTE CONF
And then I said, and by the way, we're only
interested in the deterministic ones.
NOTE CONF
So how about we stop saying we're only interested in
the deterministic ones, and think about what it might mean
NOTE CONF
if we just didn't have that restriction at all.
So what do we call something that is not a
NOTE CONF
deterministic automaton?
Well, perhaps Unimaginatively we call it a non-deterministic automaton.
NOTE CONF
And these will be called NFA.
So I will tend to use this abbreviation a lot.
NOTE CONF
And this is the original automata that I introduced.
But we can have any number of start states.
NOTE CONF
So it's got think of that.
Think of it as having distributed state.
NOTE CONF
There are many states and all of them might be
switched on when you reboot the machine.
NOTE CONF
And moreover, it might have any number of transitions from
one state to another.
NOTE CONF
So.
Deterministically, I expect if I'm in a state and I
NOTE CONF
see the letter A, there's only one place I might
go.
NOTE CONF
But in a non-deterministic automaton.
There might be two places I could go.
NOTE CONF
So here I've got something where if I see an
A, I might go there or I might go there,
NOTE CONF
and if I see a B, I might go there
and I might go there.
NOTE CONF
At this point, you should be worried.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What do I mean with this word?
Might.
NOTE CONF
Might is not a very mathematical word.
Um, so we're going to have to think about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, but first of all, I'm going to introduce yet
more symbolism.
NOTE CONF
But this is all symbols you've seen before with a
slight modification.
NOTE CONF
So this is my definition of a general kind of
automaton.
NOTE CONF
Non-deterministic automaton.
We've got the set of states as usual.
NOTE CONF
We've got the input alphabet as usual.
We've got a transition.
NOTE CONF
Now it's no longer a function.
It's now a relation.
NOTE CONF
Because when it was deterministic, it was a function because
for every start and letter there was a unique target
NOTE CONF
state.
Now it's a relation simply because there may be many
NOTE CONF
target states.
And the easiest mathematical way to represent that is as
NOTE CONF
a relation between source states, target states, and input labels.
And instead of having one starting state, we now have
NOTE CONF
a set of starting states.
Um, possibly I should call this capital Q0 or something,
NOTE CONF
but I'm calling.
It's the final states.
NOTE CONF
The accepting states are the same as before.
There are good states and bad states, but we're going
NOTE CONF
to have to think about what it means to accept
because we're no longer in the nice, simple, deterministic state
NOTE CONF
where we know where we end up.
Um, we don't need a black hole convention anymore, so
NOTE CONF
we won't use it.
Why don't we need a black hole convention?
NOTE CONF
Because we just don't write down any transitions that we
don't want, because the thing can just stop.
NOTE CONF
If you read the book when I define deterministic automata,
you saw that the book actually defines deterministic automata to
NOTE CONF
be like this, and then adds the constraints that there's
exactly one start state.
NOTE CONF
And this relation delta is functional.
It is, of course entirely a matter of taste.
NOTE CONF
Whether you define dfas as we want them to begin
with and then relax them as I've done, or whether
NOTE CONF
you start by defining the general case and say, by
the way, deterministic ones have these particular properties, uh, different
NOTE CONF
people have different views on how to do this.
So that's just notation.
NOTE CONF
It's just saying, basically, a finite automaton is a graph
of states with arrows between them.
NOTE CONF
But how do we understand this thing?
What is this thing that we're building in terms of
NOTE CONF
computation?
And the thing that makes an NFA different is that
NOTE CONF
there might be lots of states that are switched on,
or active or current at the same time.
NOTE CONF
In a deterministic automaton, it was easier.
There was only one state, and that was the current
NOTE CONF
state.
Now there might be many current states.
NOTE CONF
And how do we know which states are active?
Well, when you switch the automaton on all the start
NOTE CONF
states, all the initial states are active.
So that might be two states.
NOTE CONF
In the case of the zero, even zeros and odd
ones.
NOTE CONF
And then how does the machine behave?
Well if some state is active.
NOTE CONF
For example, suppose this state is active.
Maybe it's the initial state.
NOTE CONF
What happens when I read an A?
I said we might go to the top or we
NOTE CONF
might go to the middle.
What do we do with nondeterministic automata is keep track
NOTE CONF
of all the places that we might be.
So if I see an A.
NOTE CONF
That happens.
What does this mean in terms of computation?
NOTE CONF
It's not entirely clear.
I'll talk about that in a moment.
NOTE CONF
But that's how we can at least make a definition
of what it means for a transition to happen.
NOTE CONF
Non-deterministic.
So we make active all the states that we might
NOTE CONF
go to.
And this is why we don't need the black hole
NOTE CONF
state if we don't go anywhere.
For example, if instead I read a C.
NOTE CONF
So if from the initial state I read a C,
there is no state.
NOTE CONF
So this state stops being active and no other state
becomes active.
NOTE CONF
So the automaton is just dead.
So that's the equivalent of the black hole state.
NOTE CONF
We don't need any explicit black hole states that keep
reading stuff forever.
NOTE CONF
We just say automata can die and become switch off.
Um, and then what happens when we've read all the
NOTE CONF
input?
We're in some state.
NOTE CONF
So let's go back to the A case.
What we're going to do, and this is quite critical
NOTE CONF
is say We will say that the automaton has accepted
the input.
NOTE CONF
If any of the places we might be in is
a good state.
NOTE CONF
So remember, the double circle means a good state.
Here, after doing an A, I might be in a
NOTE CONF
bad state.
I might be in a good state.
NOTE CONF
We're going to say that if it's in any, if
any of the states we might be in a good,
NOTE CONF
then we're good.
Now, does that make any sense to you?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, maybe, um, it's an alternative.
We could have said.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we could have said if all of them.
So maybe we're quite restrictive.
NOTE CONF
And we would want to say we accept the input
if all the states are good.
NOTE CONF
Um, it turns out that doing it this way is
more practically useful.
NOTE CONF
We can think about the other type, and we will
think about it briefly right at the end.
NOTE CONF
But this way has a lot of practical applications, whereas
the other way round has fewer practical applications.
NOTE CONF
Um, again, the magic word duality, the idea of any
accepting state versus all accepting states, these are dual concepts
NOTE CONF
in a precise sense, but we tend not to cover
that in this course.
NOTE CONF
Although if you go on and do Introduction to Theoretical
Computer Science in third year, you'll get a bit more
NOTE CONF
about this.
Um.
NOTE CONF
That's what we did when we built the sum of
two automata by looking at the two components effectively.
NOTE CONF
But when we were in the deterministic world, we couldn't
leave them as two independently running things.
NOTE CONF
We had to tie them together into one bigger thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about what I'm doing so far?
This construction.
NOTE CONF
So here's a question.
How much memory do I need if I'm going actually
NOTE CONF
to program one of these things?
How much state is there to keep track of?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that's the number of states.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the question was then how much space do
I need to track that number of states?
NOTE CONF
So I've got a bunch of states.
Each state can be either active or not active.
NOTE CONF
So I need one bit of memory for each state.
Um.
NOTE CONF
With a deterministic automaton, I didn't need so much memory.
Because if a deterministic automaton has n states, I just
NOTE CONF
need to know which of those n states is the
currently active state.
NOTE CONF
So I need a a number big enough to express
one to n, which is log n bits.
NOTE CONF
So a deterministic automaton is much more compact than a
non-deterministic automaton in terms of the memory used if you're
NOTE CONF
going to program the thing.
So actually running a non-deterministic automaton requires exponentially more memory,
NOTE CONF
which sounds at first sight like a bad thing, but
it's still only one bit per state.
NOTE CONF
So as long as you have a reasonable number of
states, this is not a big deal.
NOTE CONF
Or at least not these days.
Um, how do we understand this?
NOTE CONF
So I said run an NFA.
You've already implemented Dfas.
NOTE CONF
How would you go and run an NFA?
Just do the same thing over and over.
NOTE CONF
I mean, you do kind of the same thing.
So with Dfas you track the current state.
NOTE CONF
Um, you fed it the input you saw.
What's the current state at the end?
NOTE CONF
Was is that a good state running an NFA?
What you're going to do.
NOTE CONF
Of course, is more complex because now we have initial
states, possibly several.
NOTE CONF
We feed it an input.
It might go all over the place.
NOTE CONF
We have to keep track of lots of current states.
And after we've read the input, we have a bunch
NOTE CONF
of current states.
And then we have to see if any of them
NOTE CONF
is accepting.
So it's more complex but not hard to implement.
NOTE CONF
But do we have any kind of understanding of what
we're really thinking about?
NOTE CONF
Because this idea of having multiple current states and everything
being good, if one of them is good is a
NOTE CONF
bit artificial.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Would it be run everything in parallel or would we
go like as an advantage?
NOTE CONF
Do you go through one and then another.
That's a very good question.
NOTE CONF
So the question was if you're trying to run a
non-deterministic automaton, does everything run in parallel or are you
NOTE CONF
exploring first one path, then the other path, then the
other path?
NOTE CONF
Um, what's the answer?
What's the answer if you're implementing it?
NOTE CONF
I mean, do you know any way to do it
other than by exploring one path after another?
NOTE CONF
Um, so.
There are.
NOTE CONF
ways, obviously, of doing computation in parallel.
Actually all your computers have many cores in your CPU.
NOTE CONF
I don't know how many cores.
The current CPU of the kind you buy has eight,
NOTE CONF
16, 16 now.
Um, and of course, if you care to find the
NOTE CONF
resources, we have an assortment of supercomputers scattered around the
place with several thousand processors.
NOTE CONF
And in principle, you could run things in parallel.
Okay, but that's always a bit artificial, because what if
NOTE CONF
there are more paths than several thousand?
What we would really like to do is think of
NOTE CONF
the things running in parallel, without actually having to implement
them in parallel.
NOTE CONF
And that's where there's a disconnect between our intuitive understanding
of what we would like to do and the universe
NOTE CONF
that we happen to live in.
So there are a couple of ways of trying to
NOTE CONF
understand what a non-deterministic automaton is.
This is one way, and you will see this way
NOTE CONF
used a lot in computational complexity theory if you choose
to do that.
NOTE CONF
So one way we could try to say is that,
well, the machine has a bunch of start states.
NOTE CONF
When we turn on the machine guesses or chooses.
What does that mean?
NOTE CONF
Not well defined.
One of the start states.
NOTE CONF
And then it behaves like a deterministic automaton, except that
whenever it has more than one transition as a choice,
NOTE CONF
for example, here it has the choice of going there
or there.
NOTE CONF
Again, it guesses chooses which one to follow, or alternatively
it dies.
NOTE CONF
If there is no choice.
And then we say, when does the machine accept?
NOTE CONF
Well, if there was a way that the machine could
have guessed right all the time and got to a
NOTE CONF
good point, then the input string is accepted.
This is a notion of machine and an understanding of
NOTE CONF
non-determinism that, as I say, is used a lot in
theoretical analysis because you can turn it into a mathematical
NOTE CONF
formalism that is quite easy to work with by talking
about.
NOTE CONF
Suppose I have a sequence of guesses that works well,
and then computing with that.
NOTE CONF
But the words guess and choice are very misleading here.
They don't actually correspond to anything we can really do.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't mean toss a coin, it doesn't mean
any more sophisticated kind of gambling thing.
NOTE CONF
And it absolutely is not quantum anything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, when you see this kind of thing, you tend
to think that it is quantum.
NOTE CONF
there is.
What happens in the quantum world is partly probabilistic and
NOTE CONF
partly non-deterministic.
It shares characteristics of both.
NOTE CONF
But this theoretical notion is not quantum.
And you can in fact combine non-deterministic non-determinism in this
NOTE CONF
sense with quantum computation and get something more complicated than
either, which is possibly not a great idea.
NOTE CONF
But people do it, of course, because people with funding
will do anything.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's another way that is sometimes helpful.
Instead of saying, we have to guess at each choice,
NOTE CONF
let's say, well, we don't know what to do, but
there's somebody much cleverer out there who tells us what
NOTE CONF
to do.
Now, that's also not physically realisable because who is?
NOTE CONF
Well, depending on your religious beliefs, it's not physically realisable.
Who is this thing that tells you which way to
NOTE CONF
go?
This does turn out to be a useful way of
NOTE CONF
thinking about things, theoretically, because you can use it to
think about things that are much, much more complicated than
NOTE CONF
simply nondeterminism.
And you can use the notion of an oracle that
NOTE CONF
tells you how to make your choice correctly, to leapfrog
from nondeterminism to code nondeterminism and back and forth and
NOTE CONF
get much more complicated things, which I talked about in
the introduction to to theoretical computer science.
NOTE CONF
There's a fair chance that by the time you get
to third year, I might be teaching that course again.
NOTE CONF
So this is a pre-emptive advert.
Okay, so I've said we have these machines.
NOTE CONF
I've said they don't actually have any realistic real world
understandings.
NOTE CONF
So why am I introducing something which is purely a
piece of mathematical Role play instead of something modelling something
NOTE CONF
real in the universe.
Why do we want to use them?
NOTE CONF
Because they're actually extremely useful.
It doesn't matter that they don't correspond to a real
NOTE CONF
physical thing.
They turn out to be a much easier thing to
NOTE CONF
deal with for many practical purposes than deterministic automata.
Um, in particular, some of the constructions we did last
NOTE CONF
week are much easier, and there are constructions that I
didn't even talk about last week because they were unnecessarily
NOTE CONF
complicated, which are also easy with Nsfas.
And in particular, we want to do string processing a
NOTE CONF
lot for parsing programming languages, parsing natural language, recognising bad
signals, whatever.
NOTE CONF
And with nondeterministic automata.
Things are quite easy.
NOTE CONF
So here's an example.
What's the language?
NOTE CONF
Consider this language.
The input alphabet is a B, and all we really
NOTE CONF
care about is whether the string ends with the sequence
a b.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we don't care about what happens at the
beginning, only at the end.
NOTE CONF
Can you build a deterministic automaton to recognise that.
I mean hopefully you can, but it's a bit messy
NOTE CONF
because we know that we don't care about most of
the input, but we have to care about it long
NOTE CONF
enough to realise whether it at the end, whether it's
at the end or not.
NOTE CONF
So when I try to build a DFA, it looks
like this.
NOTE CONF
What's going on here?
Well, if I see an A, we might be about
NOTE CONF
to hit the end, so we'd better remember it.
If we see a B, we might be at the
NOTE CONF
end.
If we are, that's good.
NOTE CONF
Now what happens?
Well, if we see a B, then our string no
NOTE CONF
longer ends with a B.
So we'd better go back to the beginning.
NOTE CONF
If we see an A or string now ends with
BA, but it would be okay if it then saw
NOTE CONF
a B next.
And it's a bit hard to understand, right?
NOTE CONF
Or at least I found it.
Find these things hard to understand.
NOTE CONF
Um, looking at that, do you agree that it recognises
the language I say it recognises?
NOTE CONF
Hey, some of you are having to think about it
as I am.
NOTE CONF
Here's the nondeterministic version.
We read A and B, A's and B's at the
NOTE CONF
beginning of the string.
Then we read an a, then we read a B
NOTE CONF
and we're done.
Why does this work?
NOTE CONF
Because if we feed it some string, there are lots
of ways to run this automaton that get it wrong,
NOTE CONF
because they.
So suppose we fed it just the string a b.
NOTE CONF
One way to run the automaton is to go a
B and end up in the wrong place.
NOTE CONF
But it doesn't matter because there is one right way
to read it.
NOTE CONF
If I feed it the string a b, the right
way is to go a B and end up in
NOTE CONF
the good place.
If I feed it the string a, a, b, the
NOTE CONF
right way to read it is a, a, b, and
we end up accepting the string.
NOTE CONF
There is one way to accept.
I claim that this is much easier to understand than
NOTE CONF
this, and certainly much easier to construct than this, at
least once you're in the habit of building these things.
NOTE CONF
And that's the primary reason that we use Nfus, because
it's easy to recognise to build automata that recognise strings
NOTE CONF
with nice, simple properties like that.
Are we doing okay?
NOTE CONF
Any questions so far?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So just to clarify, if we fed the long term
finite automaton a string ABBA.
NOTE CONF
We would start off by well, being active in state
zero and state one, with first day active in state
NOTE CONF
zero, state two because of the peak, and then the
last day would sort of kill off the state of
NOTE CONF
state two.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So let's let me let's run through that.
In fact, let's actually do it on the board because
NOTE CONF
I ought to have done this.
And.
NOTE CONF
What happens if we feed it ABBA.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Well, so initially this state is active.
We feed it a.
NOTE CONF
So this state stays active and this one becomes active.
We feed it B this state is active.
NOTE CONF
So feeding it B leaves it active.
This state is active.
NOTE CONF
So feeding it B moves the activity to there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We feed it a with a.
This state is active so it stays active.
NOTE CONF
This becomes active.
This state doesn't have any transition.
NOTE CONF
So that state is dead.
So we've fed it ABA and we've ended up with
NOTE CONF
two active states neither of which is accepting.
And so the thing doesn't accept.
NOTE CONF
Our thanks here that's useful to have negative examples.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that was pictures and intuition.
There's more notation, I'm afraid.
NOTE CONF
One of the things I dislike about this subject is
the amount of notation, but one needs it.
NOTE CONF
And the main reason that you need the notation is
because you have to program this stuff, and you will
NOTE CONF
need to think about it a bit.
So.
NOTE CONF
How do I talk about.
The set of currently active states.
NOTE CONF
So I have a transition function which says an input
letter A takes me from a state to a state.
NOTE CONF
But it might be many target states for any source
state and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
This thing is just really tracking the current set of
states.
NOTE CONF
So how do you all know the notation?
Curly p?
NOTE CONF
Curly P power set.
Do you all know the term power set?
NOTE CONF
Anybody not know the term power set?
Power set the set of subsets of something.
NOTE CONF
So.
If I have a set S.
NOTE CONF
Then the power set is the set of subsets of
my original set.
NOTE CONF
You will also see this thing written as two to
the power s, for reasons that are either obvious to
NOTE CONF
you or aren't obvious, but will become so eventually.
And that was definitely in the stuff we asked you
NOTE CONF
to read before starting the course.
Um, so what is this?
NOTE CONF
This is like a transition function, but it says these
are my currently active states in here.
NOTE CONF
So that's my Q hat.
I read an input letter, and then I get the
NOTE CONF
currently active states.
And this slightly messy union is just saying for every
NOTE CONF
state that is currently active union over Q, I look
at the places I can go to by doing an
NOTE CONF
A, and I just union them all together.
So it's generalising the idea of the transition function to
NOTE CONF
think about a function from the current set of active
states to the new set of active states.
NOTE CONF
And it is a function because I'm now thinking about
the set of all the states that are switched on.
NOTE CONF
And when I do a transition, I get another set
of states that are switched on.
NOTE CONF
Um, yet again, I'm using slightly different notation from the
book.
NOTE CONF
If you care about these things, then read the two
definitions carefully and decide which one you prefer.
NOTE CONF
If you remember last week we had a thing called
the string transition function, and this was just something that
NOTE CONF
said, instead of looking at what happens when I do
one transition, let's look at what happens when I do
NOTE CONF
a sequence of transitions.
So if I am in state Q and I do
NOTE CONF
ABA, where do I end up?
This is exactly the analogous thing.
NOTE CONF
If I have a current set of active states and
I do some sequence of input actions, where do I
NOTE CONF
end up?
So the notation is messy, but the concept is simple.
NOTE CONF
Simple.
The notion of trace is very similar.
NOTE CONF
So last week a trace was the sequence of states
that we went through by looking at which state was
NOTE CONF
active in the deterministic automaton.
And now the trace is the sequence of sets of
NOTE CONF
currently active states.
So this is the initial set of active states.
NOTE CONF
And then as I feed it input then we get
successive sets of active states.
NOTE CONF
So that's my formal definition.
What's the language accepted.
NOTE CONF
This is where the slight complexity comes in because we
say anything works.
NOTE CONF
Again messy notation A string is accepted.
If I look at the string transition function, compute the
NOTE CONF
set of final states that we end up in and
see if any of them is in the set of
NOTE CONF
good states.
So that's that's all that that says.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Are these definitions looking a bit familiar?
NOTE CONF
No.
How do they differ from the definitions we had last
NOTE CONF
week for deterministic finite automaton?
Well, last week we had a transition function.
NOTE CONF
We had a string transition function.
We had a trace that was a set of states.
NOTE CONF
Now we've got a transition function which is a works
on sets of states.
NOTE CONF
Likewise the string transition function.
The trace is a sequence of sets of states.
NOTE CONF
Aren't these definitions actually basically the same as we had
last week, except that I've written Capital Q's instead of
NOTE CONF
little Q's.
So this might be suggesting to you that we could
NOTE CONF
talk about a deterministic automaton where the state of a
deterministic automaton is a set of states of the original
NOTE CONF
automaton, which is what we're about to do.
Um, because we need to prove this very important theorem.
NOTE CONF
So last week I said that we define the regular
languages to be the things that are accepted by a
NOTE CONF
deterministic finite automaton.
So that was our definition of regular.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm going to say that a language is
regular if and only if there is some non-deterministic automaton
NOTE CONF
and accepts it.
Now that's a theorem, not a definition.
NOTE CONF
So it's something that we have to prove.
Now, this might be a surprising theorem.
NOTE CONF
Or if I had kept my mouth shut two minutes
ago, it might be a surprising theorem.
NOTE CONF
Because Nondeterminism looks as if it ought to be more
complicated than determinism.
NOTE CONF
But if it's the case that the regular languages are
the languages accepted by Dfas, and it's also the case
NOTE CONF
that the regular languages are the languages accepted by Nfus,
then that tells us that nfus are basically the same
NOTE CONF
as Dfas in terms of what they can do.
So we've introduced all this complexity of weird non-deterministic stuff,
NOTE CONF
which makes no sense to achieve nothing.
Now, clearly I haven't done that.
NOTE CONF
Why have I done it?
Because it lets us achieve the same thing in a
NOTE CONF
much more concise and easier way.
How do I prove this?
NOTE CONF
I've said it's a theorem.
I haven't proved it.
NOTE CONF
Well, what we do is say you give me a
language that is recognised by a nondeterministic automata.
NOTE CONF
I will simply build the deterministic automata that accepts the
same language.
NOTE CONF
And it's very easy and we've already done it.
Um, so you will see it called the subset construction.
NOTE CONF
When you write it down as a piece of mathematical
notation, it looks a bit messy.
NOTE CONF
In fact, it looks like the previous page.
But intuitively we've already done the process several times.
NOTE CONF
So here's our nondeterministic automaton.
This is the even number of zeros and odd number
NOTE CONF
of ones thing yet again.
So as a nondeterministic automaton it has two start states.
NOTE CONF
And when we run the automaton, we have to keep
track of how the two start states evolve as we
NOTE CONF
read input.
Well, that's what we did when we built the product
NOTE CONF
automaton.
So we said, these are the initial states that corresponds
NOTE CONF
to a state over here.
Now last time when we were building the product we
NOTE CONF
wrote this as brackets E0 comma e1.
Now I'm just writing it as a set E zero
NOTE CONF
e1.
Well that doesn't matter because these things are different.
NOTE CONF
Um, and similarly when I look at how this state
behaves well as a nondeterministic automata, 19 to look at
NOTE CONF
where this one goes, and I need to look at
where this one goes.
NOTE CONF
And I find that when I read a zero, I
get e zero going to zero zero and e1 going
NOTE CONF
to E1.
So I move to a state where these are the
NOTE CONF
currently active states, and I do that, and I do
that, and I do that and I do that.
NOTE CONF
So I which is exactly the same diagram as I
had before.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so simply by running these two things in parallel
and keeping track of the set of states, I've done
NOTE CONF
the same as the product construction.
Here's another example.
NOTE CONF
This one has some non-deterministic transitions in it to make
it more complicated.
NOTE CONF
It's a curious fact that no, it's not a curious
fact.
NOTE CONF
It's because it was earlier.
Um, so here's the example on the board again.
NOTE CONF
So this has the non-deterministic transitions.
This is one that reads strings that end with an
NOTE CONF
a b.
I said it was easy to build non-deterministic.
NOTE CONF
See what happens if I try to determine size it
by keeping track of the current set of states?
NOTE CONF
Well, that's the initial state.
There.
NOTE CONF
If either.
If A happens, then as we saw on the board,
NOTE CONF
we moved to a state where both zero and one
are active.
NOTE CONF
If B happens in this state, we move to a
state where just zero is active.
NOTE CONF
When I look at this state where either 0 or
1 might be active, if B happens, I move to
NOTE CONF
a state where 0 or 2.
This is what I did on the board a moment
NOTE CONF
ago.
And if A happens, we come back to where we
NOTE CONF
are.
We have to keep going until we run out of
NOTE CONF
things to do.
So A takes me back to there and B takes
NOTE CONF
me to there.
And that I think, is the end.
NOTE CONF
And magically we have got back to the thing I
came up with as a deterministic automaton to try to
NOTE CONF
recognise this language on the previous slide.
A few few minutes ago.
NOTE CONF
You might ask, is this always going to happen?
Is it if I write down the obvious deterministic automaton,
NOTE CONF
which wasn't very obvious, I have to say, and I
write down the obvious non-deterministic automaton, and I do this
NOTE CONF
kind of construction where I go tracking states.
Do I get back to the obvious deterministic automaton?
NOTE CONF
And the answer in general is no.
So it was just pure good luck that in this
NOTE CONF
example, it happened to work out and give me the
same thing that I had come up with out of
NOTE CONF
my head.
Um, are we doing.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So any questions about what I'm doing there?
Key thing is that we're just building a new kind
NOTE CONF
of deterministic automaton where the states of the new thing
are sets of states of the old thing.
NOTE CONF
So in terms of programming it, that's very easy as
you will find out, all you need to do is
NOTE CONF
say, right, States of automaton can be anything.
They might as well be sets of states of some
NOTE CONF
other automaton.
Um, so this is a intuitive proof of the fact
NOTE CONF
that nondeterministic automata are the same in their power as
deterministic ones.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't look like something that your average mathematics supervisor
would be happy with.
NOTE CONF
So I suppose we have to think about what it
looks like in mathematics.
NOTE CONF
Um, mathematically, we go right down the definition of what
this automaton is.
NOTE CONF
It looks like this.
It's got a lot of tedious notation.
NOTE CONF
So I've got some non-deterministic automaton, and I'm going to
define its deterministic version with a hat on it.
NOTE CONF
What is m hat?
Well, the states of m hat are sets of states
NOTE CONF
of the original.
The input alphabet is the same.
NOTE CONF
The state set transition function is something messy that I'm
going to have to define the initial states.
NOTE CONF
Remarkably, the initial states are something I don't have to
change.
NOTE CONF
So here this is the set of initial states in
this deterministic automaton.
NOTE CONF
This is one state.
It's the one state that is the set of the
NOTE CONF
initial states of the original automaton.
So it can get a bit confusing keeping what level
NOTE CONF
you're working at.
And the final states are something messy.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to have to define.
So this delta hat thing I defined a couple of
NOTE CONF
slides ago.
So you can go back and read it and the
NOTE CONF
set of accepting states.
Well I also defined it.
NOTE CONF
What are the good sets of accepting states.
They are any set of states of the original automaton,
NOTE CONF
where at least one of the states is good because
we accept non-deterministic if any of our final states is
NOTE CONF
a good state, and this very tedious notation says that.
Um, I remarked earlier, when we were building the product,
NOTE CONF
that building it bit by bit.
So on the fly is the term usually used for
NOTE CONF
building it bit by bit, as we did on the
previous slide.
NOTE CONF
In this subset construction, there are often a lot of
sets of states that can never be reached in running
NOTE CONF
the automaton.
So defining it mathematically like this.
NOTE CONF
Implementing this definition is not usually a great idea.
It's usually a much better idea to follow your nose
NOTE CONF
like that.
Um, you will see the term super states.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes all that means is a state in the non-deterministic
in the deterministic automaton, which is a set of states
NOTE CONF
in the original one.
The term super state just makes it easier to keep
NOTE CONF
track of where you are in which automaton.
So practically speaking, if you need to determine as an
NOTE CONF
automaton.
And there are cases where you do need to determine
NOTE CONF
eyes an automaton, then you will do it on the
fly as we did with the picture.
NOTE CONF
So at this point, I could now spend ten very
boring minutes doing an actual mathematical proof that this definition
NOTE CONF
does the right thing.
You are fortunate that you're doing a computer science degree,
NOTE CONF
not a math degree, so I don't have to do
that.
NOTE CONF
But do try and get some practice in doing mathematical
proofs.
NOTE CONF
So some of you are going to successfully avoid almost
all of them, but some of you like them.
NOTE CONF
So for those of you who like doing proofs, write
down, as a mathematician would the proof that the language
NOTE CONF
accepted by the original NFA is the same as the
language accepted by this thing that we've just built, that
NOTE CONF
is a deterministic automaton.
Um, the proof is in the book, so if you
NOTE CONF
get stuck, you can go and look at it.
I think that's probably a good point to stop before
NOTE CONF
introducing something a little bit more complicated, but usefully much
more useful in practice.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let me just say a bit about the
plan for the rest of the course tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
With a bit of luck, will be the last official
lecture.
NOTE CONF
It's possible I might not quite finish it, in which
case we will continue next week.
NOTE CONF
So what am I planning to do next week?
Um, I have an assortment of optional things which those
NOTE CONF
of you who are not fed up with me, and
presumably that's all of you, because the rest of you
NOTE CONF
aren't here.
Um, you can come and learn about some of the
NOTE CONF
things I find fun.
So there are three things that I can talk about
NOTE CONF
next week.
It's possible I can just about managed to do all
NOTE CONF
of them with luck, so they are more about regular
expressions.
NOTE CONF
Tomorrow we're going to talk about regular expressions, which is
why we are introducing Nsfas.
NOTE CONF
We don't use Nsfas as humans.
We use something which is equivalent to them, but much
NOTE CONF
easier to write.
And there are some fun things that you can do
NOTE CONF
with things much worse.
Another thing I can do is talk about the medieval
NOTE CONF
syllogisms, which I kind of promised I would do if
you wanted me to.
NOTE CONF
And then the other thing I can do, which I
traditionally do every year, once somewhere is give a talk
NOTE CONF
about infinity and some very large numbers.
So my provisional plan would be that on Friday I
NOTE CONF
will do the infinity talk, um, not least because it
is a talk that is very hard to fit into
NOTE CONF
50 minutes, and it almost always takes 55 minutes and
way to end.
NOTE CONF
And on Thursday, if necessary, I will finish off this
topic, but otherwise I will probably talk about the syllogisms
NOTE CONF
first that will have music in it just for a
change.
NOTE CONF
And and I will.
When I played the music, I have done my best
NOTE CONF
to get permission.
I failed to do so because the group no longer
NOTE CONF
exists, but I tried and if there's time after that,
then I'll say a little bit more about the regular
NOTE CONF
expressions.
So I hope to see you tomorrow for the rest
NOTE CONF
of the official course.
And I hope to see quite a few of you
NOTE CONF
next week.